<html xml:lang="en-us" lang="en-us" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"><head>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/base.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/kotobeeInteractive.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/global.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/base.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/global.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/kotobeeInteractive.css" />

    <script type="text/javascript" src="../../../../js/kotobeeInteractive.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../../../../js/global.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../js/kotobeeInteractive.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../js/global.js"></script>

    <title>Introduction</title>
    
<meta name="m-checksum" content="1977112569" />


<meta charset="utf-8" />
 <meta name="kotobee-chapter" content="epubypzqs/EPUB/xhtml/ch1.xhtml" />
<meta name="kotobee-book" content="urn:uuid:d34ec7b2-685a-2a05-389f-004778cb4e47" />
</head>
<body>
<p>Palliative care is the care of patients who have an advanced, progressive illness that is not curable, and in general, will probably result in death within weeks or months (as opposed to many years). As such there is an emphasis on quality of life and symptom control. At times there will also be a focus on active interventions to reverse acute complications of illness and, in doing so, prolong a person’s life. At other times there will be a focus on maintaining comfort and so avoiding interventions and instead allowing a natural death. Palliative care extends past the physical to embrace emotional, spiritual and psychosocial aspects of the care of patients and their families. This is what makes it an art as well as a science. The emphasis of this book is about succinct principles and medication guidelines only, with the assumption that other aspects of the biopsychosocial determinants of health are also being explored and managed.</p>

<hr />
<p>
<style type="text/css">p.p1 {margin: 0.0px 0.0px 8.0px 0.0px; font: 12.0px Times}
</style>
</p>

<p><em>“You matter because you are you, and you matter to the end of your life. We will do all we can not only to help you die peacefully, but also to live until you die.”</em> – Dame Cicely Saunders</p>

<p><em>“There is a time for everything, and a season for every activity under the heavens: a time to be born and a time to die, a time to plant and a time to uproot, a time to kill and a time to heal, a time to tear down and a time to build, a time to weep and a time to laugh, a time to mourn and a time to dance, a time to scatter stones and a time to gather them, a time to embrace and a time to refrain from embracing, a time to search and a time to give up…”</em> &#160; - Ecclesiastes 1</p>


</body></html>