<html xml:lang="en-us" lang="en-us" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"><head>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/base.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/kotobeeInteractive.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/global.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/base.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/global.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/kotobeeInteractive.css" />

    <script type="text/javascript" src="../../../../js/kotobeeInteractive.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../../../../js/global.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../js/kotobeeInteractive.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../js/global.js"></script>

    <title>SPICT</title>
    
<meta name="m-checksum" content="611550883" />

<meta charset="utf-8" />
 <meta name="kotobee-chapter" content="epubypzqs/EPUB/xhtml/s0unic.xhtml" />
<meta name="kotobee-book" content="urn:uuid:037608be-ed02-09f5-4781-08d32c38b647" />
</head>
<body>
<p><strong>Appendix - Supportive and Palliative Care Tool (SPICT)</strong></p>

<p>The University of Edinburgh’s SPICT is used to help identify people whose health is deteriorating. Assess them for unmet supportive and palliative care needs. Plan care. Look for any general indicators of poor or deteriorating health, as well as for the specific clinical indicators noted below:</p>

<table style="width:100%">
	<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:674px;">
			<p>Unplanned hospital admission(s)</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:674px;">
			<p>Performance status is poor or deteriorating, with limited reversibility (e.g. the person stays in bed or in a chair for more than half the day)</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:674px;">
			<p>Depends on others for care due to increasing physical and/or mental health problems. The person’s carer needs more help and support</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:674px;">
			<p>The person has had&#160; significant&#160; weight loss&#160; over the last few months, or remains underweight</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:674px;">
			<p>Persistent symptoms despite optimal treatment of underlying condition(s)</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:674px;">
			<p>The person (or family) asks for palliative care; chooses to reduce, stop or not have treatment; or wishes to focus on quality of life</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
	</tbody>
</table>

<p>&#160;</p>

<table style="width:100%">
	<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:199px;">
			<p><strong>Cancer</strong></p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:199px;">
			<p>Functional ability deteriorating due to progressive cancer.</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:199px;">
			<p>Too frail for cancer treatment or treatment is for symptom control.</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
	</tbody>
</table>

<table style="width:100%">
	<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:199px;">
			<p>Functional ability deteriorating due to progressive cancer.</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:199px;">
			<p>Too frail for cancer treatment or treatment is for symptom control.</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
	</tbody>
</table>

<p>&#160;</p>

<table style="width:100%">
	<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:199px;">
			<p><strong>Dementia/ frailty</strong></p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:199px;">
			<p>Unable to dress, walk or eat without help.</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:199px;">
			<p>Eating and drinking less; difficulty with swallowing.</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:199px;">
			<p>Urinary and faecal incontinence. Not able to communicate by speaking; little social interaction.</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:199px;">
			<p>Frequent falls; fractured femur.</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:199px;">
			<p>Recurrent febrile episodes or infections; aspiration pneumonia.</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
	</tbody>
</table>

<p>&#160;</p>

<table style="width:100%">
	<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:444px;">
			<p><strong>Neurological disease</strong></p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:444px;">
			<p>Progressive deterioration in physical and/or cognitive function despite optimal therapy.</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:444px;">
			<p>Speech problems with increasing difficulty communicating and/or progressive difficulty with swallowing.</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:444px;">
			<p>Recurrent aspiration &#160;pneumonia; breathless or respiratory failure.</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:444px;">
			<p>Persistent paralysis after stroke with significant&#160; loss of function and ongoing disability.</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
	</tbody>
</table>

<p>&#160;</p>

<table style="width:100%">
	<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:199px;">
			<p><strong>Heart/ vascular disease</strong></p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:199px;">
			<p>Heart failure or extensive, untreatable coronary artery disease; with breathlessness or chest pain at rest or on minimal effort.</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:199px;">
			<p>Severe, inoperable peripheral vascular disease.</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
	</tbody>
</table>

<p>&#160;</p>

<table style="width:100%">
	<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:200px;">
			<p><strong>Respiratory disease</strong></p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:200px;">
			<p>Severe, chronic lung disease; with breathlessness at rest or on minimal effort between exacerbations.</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:200px;">
			<p>Persistent hypoxia needing long term oxygen therapy.</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:200px;">
			<p>Has needed ventilation for respiratory failure or ventilation is contraindicated.</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
	</tbody>
</table>

<p>&#160;</p>

<table style="width:100%">
	<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:200px;">
			<p><strong>Kidney disease</strong></p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:200px;">
			<p>Stage 4 or 5 chronic kidney disease (eGFR &lt; 30ml/min) with deteriorating health.</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:200px;">
			<p>Kidney failure complicating other life limiting conditions or treatments.</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:200px;">
			<p>Stopping or not starting dialysis.</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
	</tbody>
</table>

<p>&#160;</p>

<table style="width:100%">
	<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:200px;">
			<p><strong>Liver disease</strong></p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:200px;">
			<p>Cirrhosis with one or more complications in the past year: diuretic resistant ascites, hepatic encephalopathy, hepatorenal syndrome, bacterial peritonitis, recurrent variceal bleeds</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:200px;">
			<p>Liver transplant is not possible.</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
	</tbody>
</table>

<p>&#160;</p>

<p>In patients in the categories above r<strong><em>eview the current care and care planning including:</em></strong></p>

<ul>
	<li><em>Review medications</em></li>
	<li><em>Consider specialist assessment</em></li>
	<li><em>Agree current and future plan with person and family</em></li>
	<li><em>Support carers</em></li>
	<li><em>Record and communicate the care plan.</em></li>
</ul>

<p>&#160;</p>


</body></html>