<html xml:lang="en-us" lang="en-us" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"><head>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/base.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/kotobeeInteractive.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/global.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/base.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/global.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/kotobeeInteractive.css" />

    <script type="text/javascript" src="../../../../js/kotobeeInteractive.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../../../../js/global.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../js/kotobeeInteractive.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../js/global.js"></script>

    <title>Seizures</title>
    

<meta name="m-checksum" content="-1372538222" />
<meta charset="utf-8" />
 <meta name="kotobee-chapter" content="epubypzqs\EPUB\xhtml\s25esa.xhtml" />
<meta name="kotobee-book" content="urn:uuid:9aabc674-7ec6-a833-f3d7-79bb6e0ae7de" />
</head>
<body>
<p>Focal seizures with secondary generalization are a complication of brain tumours, both primary and secondary. In most cases (except possibly in patients with melanoma with multiple cerebral deposits with haemorrhage),&#160;primary prophylaxis with anti-epileptics does not reduce the risk. However, preventative anti-epileptic medications are usually appropriate after a first seizure.</p>

<p>Seizures may also occur because of metabolic disturbances (e.g. hyponatraemia) or as part of a pre-existing epilepsy. As with all problems in palliative care, the management needs to be tailored to the individual patient based on the stage of illness and patient’s function and previously expressed wishes.</p>

<div><strong><em><u>Treating a seizure – the acute setting</u></em></strong></div>

<p>A quick-acting benzodiazepines is usually the best initial treatment.</p>

<p><em>If outside of hospital</em>&#160;-&gt;</p>

<ul>
	<li>Clonazepam 1mg subcut (or IM) or clonazepam drops 1mg (10 drops) sublingually</li>
	<li>Exclude hypoglycaemia</li>
	<li>Repeat the dose of clonazepam 15 minutes later if the seizure is ongoing</li>
	<li>If the cause is unknown or if the family is not prepared to manage seizures, hospital admission is appropriate. It may be appropriate to call an ambulance, especially if the seizure is still happening. If the cause is known and the seizure has stopped, hospital admission may not be required.</li>
</ul>

<p><em>If in a hospital setting</em>&#160;-&gt;</p>

<ul>
	<li>Get help and discuss with an experienced doctor</li>
	<li>Midazolam 5mg <em>slowly</em> IV until seizure stops (or midazolam 5mg subcut or IM)</li>
	<li>Watch SaO2 and support the airway</li>
	<li>Exclude hypoglycaemia</li>
	<li>If seizure has not settled within 15 minutes &#160;-&gt;
	<ul>
		<li>Repeat the benzodiazepine dose</li>
	</ul>
	</li>
	<li>If the seizure continues, further benzodiazepines are unlikely to be effective. Seek urgent advice from a senior doctor regarding the appropriateness of referral to the intensive care unit
	<ul style="list-style-type:circle;">
		<li>If intensive care is appropriate, call intensive care and consider giving IV phenytoin</li>
	</ul>
	</li>
</ul>

<p>If the patient is thought to be imminently dying, prepare the family that death may be near. <a class="link962" href="sydm84.xhtml">Phenobarbitone</a>&#160;can be used for seizures refractory to midazolam.</p>

<p><strong><em><u>Preventing further seizures</u></em></strong></p>

<p>Treat any underlying precipitants. If already on anti-epileptics, modify dose if appropriate.</p>

<p>For seizures due to cerebral tumours, sodium valproate or levetiracetam are good options:</p>

<ul>
	<li>Sodium valproate 200mg twice daily (typical maximum 800mg twice daily)</li>
	<li>OR</li>
	<li>Levetiracetam <em><sup>(streamlined authority)</sup></em> 500mg orally twice daily (maximum dose: 1,500 mg twice daily)</li>
</ul>

<p>Remember to advise a patient against driving following a seizure.</p>

<p>For seizures in a patient entering the last days of life, replace oral anti-epileptics with:&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;&#160;</p>

<ul>
	<li>Clonazepam 1mg subcut PRN for any further seizures<br />
	AND</li>
	<li>Clonazepam 2mg over 24 hours via CSCI<br />
	OR</li>
	<li>Levetiracetam via CSCI over 24 hours (e.g. 1,000mg)</li>
</ul>


</body></html>