<html xml:lang="en-us" lang="en-us" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"><head>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/base.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/kotobeeInteractive.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/global.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/base.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/global.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/kotobeeInteractive.css" />

    <script type="text/javascript" src="../../../../js/kotobeeInteractive.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../../../../js/global.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../js/kotobeeInteractive.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../js/global.js"></script>

    <title>Methadone for refractory pain</title>
    
<meta name="m-checksum" content="1544588642" />

<meta charset="utf-8" />
 <meta name="kotobee-chapter" content="epubypzqs/EPUB/xhtml/s530xo.xhtml" />
<meta name="kotobee-book" content="urn:uuid:44f89790-78ee-0600-fda4-3496a815e062" />
</head>
<body>
<p><strong>Appendix - Methadone</strong></p>

<p><strong><em>Methadone in palliative patients should only be used under the direction of a palliative care specialist. Speak to one before initiating methadone.</em></strong></p>

<p>Methadone often provides good analgesia in patients with terminal illnesses. It has unusual pharmacokinetics with a very long half-life of days and toxicity can occur unexpectedly after a week or more of an apparently well tolerated dose regimen.</p>

<p><strong>Indication: </strong>Pain refractory to other treatment, especially pain associated with a neuropathic component, opioid-tolerance or central sensitisation</p>

<hr />
<p><strong>Some advantages of methadone</strong></p>

<p>Dosing unaffected by renal failure.</p>

<p>Often brings significant benefits at low doses allowing for major reduction in the dose other opioids. It may also be beneficial in opioid-induced hyperalgesia.</p>

<hr />
<p><strong>Commencing methadone</strong></p>

<p>Guidelines for using methadone in the palliative context vary widely. This guideline suggests a conservative approach where low-dose methadone is added on top the patient’s current analgesia.</p>

<p>Before starting exclude a prolonged QTc by performing an ECG.</p>

<p>Start at 5mg orally at night. Continue any pre-existing regular and PRN analgesia.</p>

<hr />
<p><strong>Increasing the dose</strong></p>

<p>If inadequate analgesia is achieved within 3-5 days, the dose can be increased to 5mg twice daily. Monitor for adverse effects.</p>

<p>The dose can be increased further in small 5mg increments ever 5-7 days if necessary however speak to a senior palliative care doctor.</p>

<p>Recheck the ECG after 2-4 weeks to ensure that the QTc interval remains &lt; 0.5.</p>

<p>Consider gradually reducing the dose of other background opioids such as a fentanyl patch whilst titrating up the methadone, especially if adverse effects or a poor response to these opioids (or opioid-induced hyperalgesia) is suspected.</p>

<hr />
<p><strong>Long-term dosing and stopping methadone</strong></p>

<p>If significant side effects occur (e.g. sedation and reduced respiratory rate) then stop the methadone and reduce other opioids. In serious cases naloxone may be needed.</p>

<p>If there is no apparent improvement with methadone cease it.</p>

<p>If there is good analgesia, consider reducing the dose of other long-acting opioids and continuing the methadone longer term.</p>

<hr />
<table style="width:100%">
	<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:140px;">
			<p><strong>Precautions</strong></p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:140px;">
			<p>Previous arrhythmias</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:140px;">
			<p>Prolonged QTc &gt; 0.5</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:140px;height:52px;">
			<p>Any reason to be cautious with any opioid</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
	</tbody>
</table>

<hr />
<table style="width:100%">
	<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:141px;">
			<p><strong>Adverse Effects</strong></p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:141px;">
			<p>Sedation</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:141px;">
			<p>Respiratory depression</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:141px;">
			<p>Arrhythmias associated with QT prolongation</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:141px;">
			<p>Constipation</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:141px;">
			<p>Nausea</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
	</tbody>
</table>

<hr />
<table style="width:100%">
	<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:141px;">
			<p align="center"><strong><em>Subcut&#160;Methadone</em></strong></p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:141px;">
			<p>10mg oral ≈ 10mg subcut</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:141px;">
			<p>Give as twice daily subcut boluses or a CSCI</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:141px;">
			<p style="text-align: center;"><em><strong>Compatible with:</strong></em></p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:141px;">
			<p>Cyclizine (use water for injection)</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:141px;">
			<p>Haloperidol</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:141px;">
			<p>Ketamine</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:141px;">
			<p>Levomepromazine</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:141px;">
			<p>Midazolam</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:141px;">
			<p>Haloperidol <em>+ </em>midazolam</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:141px;">
			<p>Ketamine <em>+ </em>midazolam</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:141px;">
			<p>Levomepromazine <em>+</em> hyoscine butylbromide</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:141px;">
			<p>Levomepromazine + midazolam</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:141px;">
			<p>Levomepromazine <em>+ </em>hyoscine butylbromide <em>+ </em>midazolam</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
	</tbody>
</table>


</body></html>