<html xml:lang="en-us" lang="en-us" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"><head>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/base.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/kotobeeInteractive.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/global.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/base.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/global.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/kotobeeInteractive.css" />

    <script type="text/javascript" src="../../../../js/kotobeeInteractive.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../../../../js/global.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../js/kotobeeInteractive.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../js/global.js"></script>

    <title>Using this booklet</title>
    


<meta name="m-checksum" content="-123304484" />
<meta charset="utf-8" />
 <meta name="kotobee-chapter" content="epubypzqs\EPUB\xhtml\s7rzzs.xhtml" />
<meta name="kotobee-book" content="urn:uuid:c136a3a9-6302-770d-5f09-3f379ed93c32" />
</head>
<body>
<p>This book is intended for use by primary and secondary care doctors (especially in Queensland) caring for patients with terminal illnesses.</p>

<p>It is not meant to be a replacement for other textbooks – how could a book this small ever do that! Nor is it intended as a set of strict protocols that should always be followed. Rather, this book is intended for health professionals who have a good background knowledge of general medicine and pharmacology and can use that background knowledge and their experience in conjunction with the advice found on these pages.</p>

<p>The treatments suggested in this book will not be appropriate in all circumstances. This book supplements, but should not replace, other sources (e.g. the AMH; education and training; seeking advice from the palliative care team). Medication adverse effects, contra-indications and drug-drug interactions are not discussed in any significant detail in this book. This means that the usual competencies of clinicians and prescribers are assumed. If in doubt, seek advice from other sources.<br />
&#160;</p>


</body></html>