<html xml:lang="en-us" lang="en-us" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"><head>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/base.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/kotobeeInteractive.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/global.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/base.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/global.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/kotobeeInteractive.css" />

    <script type="text/javascript" src="../../../../js/kotobeeInteractive.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../../../../js/global.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../js/kotobeeInteractive.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../js/global.js"></script>

    <title>Fentanyl</title>
    

<meta name="m-checksum" content="-398173843" />
<meta charset="utf-8" />
 <meta name="kotobee-chapter" content="epubypzqs\EPUB\xhtml\sajzlb.xhtml" />
<meta name="kotobee-book" content="urn:uuid:5d6b6427-e06d-670d-fc3d-e643e8ef3322" />
</head>
<body>
<p><em>See also:</em> <a class="link377" href="../../../raw/si8w3j.xhtml">Fentanly syringe driver compatibilities</a></p>

<table>
	<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td><strong>Fentanyl patch prescribing tips</strong></td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>
			<p>Fentanyl patches hold the drug in a matrix.</p>

			<p>The amount of drug delivered is related to the surface area of the patch, so a 50mcg/hour patch is twice the surface area of a 25mcg/hour patch.</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>
			<p>The patch needs to be in contact with the skin completely, for the correct amount of fentanyl to be absorbed.</p>

			<p>If the edges are lifting up, the patient will be receiving sub optimal fentanyl.</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>
			<p>Fentanyl patches work by releasing fentanyl into the subcutaneous fat which is then absorbed into the systemic circulation.</p>

			<p>If the patient is significantly cachexic, the drug will not be absorbed. This is important to understand. For example, when swapping from a 100mcg/hour patch to oral morphine you would generally consider prescribing somewhere around 300mg of oral morphine in 24hours, however in a cachectic patient where the drug wasn’t being absorbed well, the patient may only need a much smaller oral morphine equivalent of say, for example 60mg over 24 hours.</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>
			<p>PRN or “as required” breakthrough fentanyl comes in injection (non-PBS), lozenge,&#160; sublingual and buccal formulations</p>

			<p>These PRN doses do not bear a direct relationship to patch size. For example, a breakthrough of sublingual 100mcg fentanyl does NOT equate to 100mcg/h patch.</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>
			<p>When the patch is applied the first time, analgesia will emerge in the first 24 hours, but can take many days to start to approach steady state.</p>

			<p>Therefore do not titrate up the patch dose rapidly over a few day because doing so will significantly risk causing opioid overdose.</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>Never commence an opioid naïve patient on a fentanyl patch; there is significant risk of opioid overdose.</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>Applying heat on a patch will increase its rate of absorption, causing opioid toxicity.</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>
			<p>For some patients, the patches only last 48 hours instead of 72 hours.&#160;In this patients, change the patch every 48 hours, rather than increasing the dose.</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
	</tbody>
</table>

<table style="width:100%">
	<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:697px;">
			<p>&#160;</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
	</tbody>
</table>

<table style="width:100%">
	<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:697px;">
			<p><strong>Sublingual and buccal fentanyl prescription tips</strong></p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:697px;">
			<p>There are various formulations of buccal and sublingual fentanyl available that are marketed as rapid acting opioids.</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:697px;">
			<p>Do not use in opioid naïve patients.</p>

			<p>Rapid acting fentanyl preparations should only be used if a patient is already on a regular long-acting opioid (equivalent to at least 60mg of daily oral morphine).</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:697px;">
			<p>The effective dose of rapid acting fentanyl preparations cannot be estimated by considering the background oral opioid as can usually be done for other immediate release opioids.</p>

			<p>Therefore when starting rapidly acting fentanyl preparations, the usual advice is to start at the lowest possible dose (e.g. 100 micrograms) and titrate upwards as necessary, regardless of the background long-acting opioid dose.</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:697px;">
			<p>Mouth ulcers and mucositis can affect the absorption of sublingual and buccal fentanyl.</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:697px;">
			<p>Rapid acting fentanyl preparations typically have a more rapid onset of action than oral hydromorphone, morphine and oxycodone and therefore are worth considering for patients with predictable incident pain.</p>

			<p>For example, consider prescribing 15-minutes prior to dressing for a patient who has severe arm pain from a humerus metastasis each day when getting dressed.</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
	</tbody>
</table>

<p>&#160;</p>


</body></html>