<html xml:lang="en-us" lang="en-us" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"><head>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/base.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/kotobeeInteractive.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/global.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/base.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/global.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/kotobeeInteractive.css" />

    <script type="text/javascript" src="../../../../js/kotobeeInteractive.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../../../../js/global.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../js/kotobeeInteractive.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../js/global.js"></script>

    <title>Prognostication</title>
    

<meta name="m-checksum" content="-189942088" />

<meta charset="utf-8" />
 <meta name="kotobee-chapter" content="epubypzqs\EPUB\xhtml\sdegiv.xhtml" />
<meta name="kotobee-book" content="urn:uuid:c7bb5102-bae1-fb57-634f-b05c4ed18cce" />
</head>
<body>
<p>Predicting life expectancy is not easy and it is as much an art as a science. Of course none of us know the future and so it is not helpful to be too definite about a patient’s prognosis.</p>

<p>None-the-less, being able to make a reasonable, educated guess about a patient’s illness trajectory and the likely prognosis is important because:</p>

<ul>
	<li>Some patients (and their relatives) want to know this (although it is equally true that some do not)</li>
	<li>It helps inform decisions regarding how aggressively to treat complications as they arise</li>
</ul>

<p>If discussing prognosis and life expectancy with a patient, be sensitive, compassionate and honest in your approach. Do not be afraid to be unsure and to defer to other doctors and specialists who have more experience in treating the patient’s particular illness.</p>

<p>A key element to determining prognosis is to understand the natural history of the particular disease that the patient suffers from. It is helpful to remember that new treatments are changing the trajectory and course of many illnesses.</p>

<p>Traditionally advanced cancer has been relatively straight-forward in terms of prognostication, although with the advent of immunotherapy this is changing. The course and natural history of end-stage organ failure (e.g. liver failure due to cirrhosis) is very variable and it is harder to be reasonably sure about the prognosis when compared to advanced metastatic cancer. Acute deteriorations are more often reversible and so knowing when to withdraw (or not offer) treatment can be quite difficult.</p>

<p>The following information boxes, tools and rules of thumb may be helpful in determining prognosis. None of them is perfect, however, so use them in conjunction with common sense.</p>

<p>Additional tools found in the appendix that help prognosticate include the <a class="link631" href="s0unic.xhtml">SPICT</a> and <a class="link652" href="sknzpb.xhtml">PCOC scores</a>.</p>

<ul>
	<li><a class="link525" href="shm7zu.xhtml">Advanced cancer</a></li>
	<li><a class="link627" href="srv08z.xhtml">Cirrhosis</a></li>
	<li><a class="link154" href="s5lqai.xhtml">Chronic kidney disease</a></li>
	<li><a class="link441" href="slgmmq.xhtml">Congestive cardiac failure</a></li>
	<li><a class="link532" href="s31up4.xhtml">Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease</a></li>
</ul>


</body></html>