<html xml:lang="en-us" lang="en-us" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"><head>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/base.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/kotobeeInteractive.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/global.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/base.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/global.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/kotobeeInteractive.css" />

    <script type="text/javascript" src="../../../../js/kotobeeInteractive.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../../../../js/global.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../js/kotobeeInteractive.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../js/global.js"></script>

    <title>Dyspnoea</title>
    

<meta name="m-checksum" content="671060980" />
<meta charset="utf-8" />
 <meta name="kotobee-chapter" content="epubypzqs\EPUB\xhtml\skh45v.xhtml" />
<meta name="kotobee-book" content="urn:uuid:6a2f9d2f-265c-3905-e8af-0a660a3e7aa0" />
</head>
<body>
<p>Consider the aetiologies of dyspnoea and treat these as appropriate, taking the patient’s overall state and prognosis into consideration. Thinking about the diagnosis is important when there is dyspnoea that worsens without good explanation. In particular, consider -&gt;</p>

<ul>
	<li><em>Pulmonary emboli </em>(think of this especially if dyspnoea out of proportion to extent of disease)</li>
	<li><em>Pleural effusion </em>(or a pericardial effusion or massive ascites)</li>
	<li><em>Acute respiratory infection</em></li>
	<li><em>Superior vena cava obstruction </em>(look for oedema and distended veins in the head and upper limbs)</li>
</ul>

<p>Treating the above conditions can bring significant symptomatic relief and prolong a person’s life.</p>

<table>
	<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td><em>Condition specific symptomatic treatments to also&#160;consider:</em></td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td><strong>Options for pulmonary oedema</strong></td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>
			<ul>
				<li>Increase diuretic therapy. Frusemide can be given via CSCI. Higher doses are needed in severe renal failure</li>
				<li>Control rapid atrial fibrillation (e.g. with digoxin)</li>
				<li>Long-acting nitrates, especially at night (e.g. isosorbide dinitrate) if blood pressure permits</li>
			</ul>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td><strong>Options for exacerbation of COPD</strong></td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>
			<ul>
				<li>Short burst of increased dose of steroids, e.g. prednisolone 37.5mg daily for a a few days</li>
				<li>Antibiotics</li>
				<li>Optimise bronchodilator therapy (e.g. review inhaler technique; salbutamol more frequently)</li>
			</ul>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td><strong>Options for motor neuron disease</strong></td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>
			<ul>
				<li>Non-invasive ventilation (NIV). Assessment usually accessed by referral to a respiratory team. Deciding to have or not have NIV is a huge decision and involves delicate discussions. NIV may be appropriate if any of these present:
				<ul style="list-style-type:circle;">
					<li>Abnormal nocturnal oximetry OR</li>
					<li>FVC &lt; 50% predicted OR</li>
					<li>Orthopnoea</li>
				</ul>
				</li>
			</ul>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td><strong>Options for anaemia</strong></td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>
			<ul>
				<li>Transfusion (e.g. if Hb &lt; 85)</li>
			</ul>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td><strong>Options for multiple pulmonary metastases or lymphangitis carcinomatosis</strong></td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>
			<ul>
				<li>Dexamethasone 8 mg daily</li>
			</ul>
			</td>
		</tr>
	</tbody>
</table>

<p>&#160;</p>

<p>A written breathlessness management plan can help patients deal with acute episodes of worsened dyspnoea.</p>

<p>Finally consider symptomatic treatments regardless of cause -&gt;</p>

<p>Movement of air (e.g. via a fan) usually helps.</p>

<p>Consider OT/physio and psychology input.</p>

<p><em>If there is dyspnoea at rest</em>&#160;-&gt; use of opioids is controversial, although traditionally low doses of opioids were considered potentially helpful, e.g. for opioid-naïve patients</p>

<ul>
	<li>Morphine SR 5 mg orally twice daily or 10mg once daily<br />
	PLUS</li>
	<li>Immediate release morphine 2.5 mg orally 2-hourly PRN<br />
	(See <a class="link675" href="sj65c3.xhtml">opioid section </a>for information&#160;on dosing and opioid choice)</li>
</ul>

<p><em>If there is significant anxiety and fear associated with dyspnoea</em>&#160;-&gt;&#160;anxiolytics may help; choice partially depends on life expectancy <em><sup>(non-PBS indication for both)</sup></em></p>

<ul>
	<li>Months -&gt;&#160;Citalopram 10mg orally daily</li>
	<li>Weeks -&gt;&#160;Clonazepam drops 3 drops sublingually or orally 4-hourly PRN</li>
</ul>

<p><em>If there is evidence of hypoxia -&gt;</em>&#160;oxygen may help</p>

<ul>
	<li>Oxygen continuously for dyspnoea at rest (titrate to symptoms)<br />
	OR<br />
	Oxygen 2-4 litres on exertion and PRN for exertional dyspnoea</li>
	<li>(Use oxygen cautiously in patients who are at risk of CO2 retention, e.g. those with COPD)</li>
</ul>


</body></html>