<html xml:lang="en-us" lang="en-us" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"><head>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/base.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/kotobeeInteractive.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/global.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/base.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/global.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/kotobeeInteractive.css" />

    <script type="text/javascript" src="../../../../js/kotobeeInteractive.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../../../../js/global.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../js/kotobeeInteractive.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../js/global.js"></script>

    <title>A few PBS tips</title>
    


<meta name="m-checksum" content="1217444145" />
<meta charset="utf-8" />
 <meta name="kotobee-chapter" content="epubypzqs/EPUB/xhtml/slluc4.xhtml" />
<meta name="kotobee-book" content="urn:uuid:e0446129-7526-1647-ebe1-34e9c7049155" />
</head>
<body>
<p>Prescribing medications frequently used in palliative care (especially ones at the end of life) within the hospital setting is usually relatively straight-forward however in the community it can be more problematic because certain drugs are not covered by the PBS (i.e. private prescriptions are required). Some helpful tips for prescribing in the community that are accurate for 2021 are listed below. These tips primarily, although not exclusively, relate to medications for end-of-life care in the home setting.</p>

<p>For injectable opioids:</p>

<ul>
	<li>Injectable oxycodone and fentanyl are not available through the PBS whereas injectable morphine and hydromorphone are.</li>
</ul>

<p>For benzodiazepines:</p>

<ul>
	<li>Injectable midazolam is not available through the PBS. Prescription of injectable clonazepam for palliative care patients became available through the PBS in 2021.&#160;</li>
</ul>

<p>For anti-secretory agents:</p>

<ul>
	<li>Injectable glycopyrrolate and hyoscine hydrobromide are not available through the PBS whereas injectable hyoscine butylbromide (Buscopan) through a streamlined authority number is.</li>
</ul>

<p>For co-analgesics:</p>

<ul>
	<li>Gabapentin is an authority-required drug whereas pregabalin is a stream-lined authority drug.</li>
	<li>Methadone is a restricted-benefit medication (“severe disabling pain unresponsive to non-opioid analgesics”)</li>
	<li>Amitriptyline and valproate are available without PBS restrictions.</li>
</ul>


</body></html>