<html xml:lang="en-us" lang="en-us" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"><head>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/base.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/kotobeeInteractive.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/global.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/base.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/global.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/kotobeeInteractive.css" />

    <script type="text/javascript" src="../../../../js/kotobeeInteractive.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../../../../js/global.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../js/kotobeeInteractive.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../js/global.js"></script>

    <title>Subcutaneous compatibilities</title>
    


<meta name="m-checksum" content="11032838" />
<meta charset="utf-8" />
 <meta name="kotobee-chapter" content="epubypzqs/EPUB/xhtml/snsmz5.xhtml" />
<meta name="kotobee-book" content="urn:uuid:6932c45c-0783-c1c2-6a90-53c86c2605b1" />
</head>
<body>
<p>Mixing medications in subcutaneous infusions can cause problems if there are drug incompatibilities that cause reactions. Always use caution when mixing medications looking especially for crystallization. The following tables lists some compatible combinations – these are not an exhaustive list. If unsure about a combination, speak to a palliative care pharmacist, physician or nurse specialist.</p>

<p>Sodium chloride 0.9% is the diluent used routinely in Australia and is used as the diluent throughout these guidelines unless otherwise stated.</p>

<p>Some important considerations:</p>

<ul>
	<li>Cyclizine is diluted with Water for Injection. There is a risk of precipitation when cyclizing is mixed with drugs formulated in a solution containing chloride ions or if pH &gt; 6.8.&#160; Cyclizine is incompatible with hyoscine butylbromide and fentanyl.</li>
	<li>Glycopyrrolate is acidic (pH 2.3-4.3) and should not be added to mixtures where pH &gt; 6</li>
	<li>Haloperidol &gt; 1mg/mL in sodium chloride 0.9% may precipitate</li>
	<li>Ranitidine has shown to be incompatible with midazolam and levomepromazine (may be concentration dependent)</li>
</ul>

<p><a class="link501" href="../../../raw/sybp63.xhtml">Morphine compatabilities</a></p>

<p><a class="link673" href="../../../raw/skp7xv.xhtml">Oxycodone compatabilities</a></p>

<p><a class="link415" href="../../../raw/stbebq.xhtml">Hydromorphone compatabilities</a></p>

<p><a class="link117" href="../../../raw/saduk2.xhtml">Fentanyl compatabilities</a></p>

<p><a class="link702" href="../../../raw/s8zz76.xhtml">Opioid-free compatabilities</a></p>

<table>
	<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td colspan="3" style="width:697px;">
			<p align="center"><strong>The following drugs <em>cannot be combined</em> <em>in the same syringe</em> with other drugs</strong></p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:232px;">
			<p>Diclofenac</p>
			</td>
			<td style="width:232px;">
			<p>Frusemide</p>
			</td>
			<td style="width:232px;">
			<p>Levetiracetam</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:232px;">
			<p>Phenobarbitone</p>
			</td>
			<td style="width:232px;">
			<p>Lignocaine</p>
			</td>
			<td style="width:232px;">
			<p>Valproate</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
	</tbody>
</table>

<p>&#160;</p>

<p><em>References:</em></p>

<p>1 - Dickman and Schneider. The Syringe Driver 3<sup>rd</sup> Edition. 2015</p>

<p>2 - <a class="link401" href="http://www.palliativedrugs.com" target="_blank">www.palliativedrugs.com</a></p>

<p>3 -&#160;Eastern Metropolitan Region Palliative Care (Victoria). Syringe Driver Drugs. 2016</p>

<p>4 - Isle of Wight Syringe Driver Compatibility Guidelines. 2016</p>

<p>&#160;</p>


</body></html>