<html xml:lang="en-us" lang="en-us" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"><head>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/base.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/kotobeeInteractive.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/global.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/base.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/global.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/kotobeeInteractive.css" />

    <script type="text/javascript" src="../../../../js/kotobeeInteractive.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../../../../js/global.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../js/kotobeeInteractive.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../js/global.js"></script>

    <title>Lignocaine infusions</title>
    

<meta name="m-checksum" content="-1038214958" />
<meta charset="utf-8" />
 <meta name="kotobee-chapter" content="epubypzqs/EPUB/xhtml/sqchdf.xhtml" />
<meta name="kotobee-book" content="urn:uuid:b5476f3e-4955-1fa1-99bc-deb2645adb51" />
</head>
<body>
<p><strong>Appendix - Lidocaine</strong></p>

<p><strong><em>Lidocaine (previously lignocaine) in palliative patients should only be used under the direction of a palliative care specialist. Speak to one before initiating lidocaine.</em></strong></p>

<p>A subcutaneous infusion of lidocaine <em><sup>(non-PBS)</sup></em> is a useful treatment option in patients with a terminal illness who have severe pain refractory to other treatments. It requires careful assessment, consent and monitoring by a clinician familiar with its place, use and evidence-base relative to alternatives.<br />
<br />
<strong>Indication: </strong>Pain (especially neuropathic pain) refractory to other analgesia.</p>

<div align="center">
<hr align="center" size="2" width="100%" /></div>

<p><strong>Before starting</strong></p>

<p>Exclude contraindications by performing an ECG. Do not use in patients with a history of an arrhythmia without first discussing with a cardiologist. Exhaust all other available treatment options before using in patients in the “precautions” group.</p>

<p>Check the blood pressure, heart rate, respiratory rate and sedation and pain scores.</p>

<p>Communicate and gain consent.</p>

<div align="center">
<hr align="center" size="2" width="100%" /></div>

<p><strong>Commencing an infusion</strong></p>

<p>Start at a dose of 500mg via continuous subcutaneous infusion over 24 hours. In a thin and elderly person, consider beginning at 250 mg over 24 hours.</p>

<p>Monitor HR, RR, BP and sedation score at 2, 4 and 8 hours and thereafter three times daily. Perform an ECG the day following infusion.</p>

<div align="center">
<hr align="center" size="2" width="100%" /></div>

<p><strong>Increasing the dose</strong></p>

<p>If inadequate analgesia is achieved, consider increasing the infusion rate by 250-500mg every 24-48 hours to a maximum dose of 1,500mg per day. With each increase in dose, recheck the ECG within 24 hours.</p>

<div align="center">
<hr align="center" size="2" width="100%" /></div>

<p><strong>Stopping an infusion</strong></p>

<p>If bradycardia, hypotension, a cardiac arrhythmia or any other significant adverse effects occur, cease the infusion.</p>

<p>If, 24-hours after reaching the maximum dose, there has been no improvement in pain, cease the infusion.</p>

<p>If good analgesia occurs, consider gradually tapering the infusion by reducing in 250-500 mg increments every 24-48 hours. Consider complementing the reduction in lignocaine with a corresponding increase in other analgesic agents, e.g. methadone.</p>

<hr />
<table style="width:100%">
	<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:189px;">
			<p><strong>Absolute Contraindications</strong></p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:189px;">
			<p>AV block</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:189px;">
			<p>Stokes-Adams attacks</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:189px;">
			<p>Wolf-Parkinson-White syndrome</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:189px;">
			<p>Previous sensitivity</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
	</tbody>
</table>

<hr />
<table style="width:100%">
	<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:147px;">
			<p><strong>Precautions</strong></p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:147px;">
			<p>Arrhythmias</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:147px;">
			<p>Cardiac failure</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:147px;">
			<p>Seizures</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:147px;">
			<p>Liver failure</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:147px;">
			<p>Renal failure</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
	</tbody>
</table>

<hr />
<table style="width:100%">
	<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:147px;">
			<p><strong>Adverse Effects</strong></p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:147px;">
			<p>Most are dose-related and are unlikely with doses under 2mg/kg/hour.</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:147px;">
			<p>Cardiovascular – hypotension, bradycardia</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:147px;">
			<p>Neuromuscular – light-headedness, tingling, muscle spasm, dysphasia, seizures, drowsiness</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:147px;">
			<p>Respiratory arrest</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
	</tbody>
</table>

<p>&#160;</p>


</body></html>