<html xml:lang="en-us" lang="en-us" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"><head>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/base.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/kotobeeInteractive.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/global.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/base.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/global.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/kotobeeInteractive.css" />

    <script type="text/javascript" src="../../../../js/kotobeeInteractive.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../../../../js/global.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../js/kotobeeInteractive.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../js/global.js"></script>

    <title>Ultrasound guided ascitic tap guidelines</title>
    

<meta name="m-checksum" content="136431220" />
<meta charset="utf-8" />
 <meta name="kotobee-chapter" content="epubypzqs\EPUB\xhtml\sr4zjy.xhtml" />
<meta name="kotobee-book" content="urn:uuid:1d4bb479-f733-728c-0361-990a32c8c9e7" />
</head>
<body>
<p><strong>Appendix - Ascitic tap</strong></p>

<p><strong>Indication:</strong>&#160;To relieve abdominal discomfort (and dyspnoea) due to significant amounts of ascites.</p>

<hr />
<table>
	<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td><strong>Equipment Required</strong></td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>Sterile gloves</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>Iodine scrub (to wash hands)</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>Basic dressing pack</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>Anti-septic solution (e.g. chlorhexidine)</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>Small gauge needle (e.g. 23 gauge)</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>Small syringe (e.g. 5 or 10 ml)</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>Local anaesthetic (e.g. 1% lidocaine)</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>Large gauge long IV line or equivalent (e.g. 14 guage AngioCath or Yueh Centesis Catheter)</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>Drainge bag (e.g. 2 litre drainage bag with male connection)</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>Sticky-tape (e.g. Leukopor)</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>Dressing (e.g. Tegarderm)</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>Sharps container</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td><strong>PLUS</strong></td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td><strong>Hand-held or portable ultrasound</strong></td>
		</tr>
	</tbody>
</table>

<p>&#160;</p>

<hr />
<p><strong>Technique </strong></p>

<ul>
	<li>Exclude contra-indications. Gain consent</li>
	<li>Lie the patient supine with the abdomen exposed</li>
	<li>Select a site where there is shifting dullness. Confirm the presence of a deep pocket of ascites here with an ultrasound and note its depth. Mark the skin clearly with a pen</li>
	<li>Wash your hands and put on sterile gloves</li>
	<li>Clean the skin with anti-septic solution</li>
	<li>Draw up lidocaine. Using a small-gauge needle, insert the needle at a right-angle to the skin, drawing back as you proceed until you get a flash-back of ascites. If you have difficult or do not get a flash-back&#160;then abandon the procedure (and organize via radiology), otherwise slowly inject the anaesthetic whilst withdrawing the needle. Wait a few minutes.</li>
	<li>Insert the drainage catheter at a right-angle to the skin. On getting flash-back or feeling the “give” of insertion through the peritoneum, insert the needle another centimetre and then withdraw it whilst inserting the plastic tube fully.</li>
	<li>Ascitic fluid should now be draining. Attach a drainage bag. Ensure the catheter and bag tubing is attached firmly to the abdominal wall (e.g. with sticky-tape).</li>
	<li>Allow drainage to occur. You may need to empty the bag a number of times. Drainage may take several hours. For ascites due to portal hypertension, albumin replacement is recommended if draining more than 5 litres</li>
</ul>

<table>
	<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td>
			<p><strong>Albumin Replacement Formula:</strong></p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>
			<p>Give 100ml of 20% albumin for every 2.5 litres drained</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
	</tbody>
</table>

<ul>
	<li>Once the drainage stops or slows significantly, remove the catheter and cover the wound site with a dressing. If leakage of ascites occurs in the hours and days following the procedure, a colostomy bag can be used to prevent soaking of shirt and sheets.</li>
	<li>Monitor blood pressure and pulse hourly for 4-hours post procedure and review the patient if these become abnormal.</li>
</ul>

<hr />
<table>
	<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td><strong>Potential complications include:</strong></td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>Infection (e.g. cellulitis)</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>Bleeding</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>Bowel perforation or organ damage</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>Hypotension</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>Leakage of ascites</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>
			<p><em>The first 4 complications are rare and risk can be minimized by:</em></p>

			<ol>
				<li><em>Using a sterile technique</em></li>
				<li><em>Checking for bleeding risks and INR and&#160; platelets prior to procedure</em></li>
				<li><em>Using an ultrasound to confirm a deep pocket of ascites</em></li>
				<li><em>Albumin replacement (for large taps of ascites due to portal hypertension)</em></li>
			</ol>
			</td>
		</tr>
	</tbody>
</table>

<hr />
<table>
	<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td colspan="2"><strong>Be catious if:</strong></td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>INR &gt; 1.5</td>
			<td>Platelets &lt; 100</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td colspan="2"><strong>Consider correction if:</strong></td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>INR &gt; 2</td>
			<td>Platelets &lt; 50</td>
		</tr>
	</tbody>
</table>

<p>&#160;</p>


</body></html>