<html xml:lang="en-us" lang="en-us" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"><head>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/base.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/kotobeeInteractive.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/global.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/base.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/global.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/kotobeeInteractive.css" />

    <script type="text/javascript" src="../../../../js/kotobeeInteractive.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../../../../js/global.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../js/kotobeeInteractive.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../js/global.js"></script>

    <title>Ketamine infusions</title>
    
<meta name="m-checksum" content="-2012463780" />

<meta charset="utf-8" />
 <meta name="kotobee-chapter" content="epubypzqs/EPUB/xhtml/ss8vps.xhtml" />
<meta name="kotobee-book" content="urn:uuid:b559216d-68ab-8fb6-8703-7323de6496d7" />
</head>
<body>
<p><strong>Appendix - Ketamine</strong></p>

<p><strong><em>Ketamine in palliative patients should only be used under the direction of a palliative care specialist. Speak to one before initiating ketamine.</em></strong></p>

<p>Ketamine <em><sup>(non-PBS)</sup></em> is an option in patients with a terminal illness who have severe pain refractory to other treatments although the evidence is mixed and conflicting.</p>

<p><strong>Indication: </strong>Pain (especially neuropathic pain) refractory to other analgesia.</p>

<div align="center">
<hr align="center" size="2" width="100%" /></div>

<p><strong>Before starting</strong></p>

<p>Check blood pressure, heart rate, respiratory rate and conscious level. Exclude contraindications. If longer term use (&gt;weeks) is anticipated, ensure hepatotoxicity and urotoxicity are considered when obtaining consent and arranging monitoring.</p>

<p>Prescribe PRN haloperidol and PRN midazolam for hallucinations and anxiety respectively.</p>

<p>Continue to check blood pressure, heart and respiratory rate and conscious level three times daily.</p>

<div align="center">
<hr align="center" size="2" width="100%" /></div>

<p><strong>Subcutaneous administration regimen</strong></p>

<p>Commence 100mg via continuous SC infusion over 24 hours. In a thin and elderly person, consider beginning at 50mg over 24 hours.</p>

<p>PRN ketamine 25mg 4-hourly can be prescribed in addition to PRN opioids.</p>

<p>If inadequate analgesia is achieved, consider increasing the infusion rate by 100mg every 24-48 hours to a maximum dose of 500mg per day. Continue to monitor blood pressure, heart rate, respiratory rate and conscious level.</p>

<div align="center">
<hr align="center" size="2" width="100%" /></div>

<p><strong>Oral administration regimen</strong></p>

<p>Ketamine can also be taken orally but dosing protocols vary widely.</p>

<p>Commence 10mg orally three times daily and 10mg PRN 4 hourly. If inadequate analgesia is achieved, consider increasing in 10mg increments every 24-48 hours to a maximum dose of 100mg three times daily. Continue to monitor blood pressure, heart rate, respiratory rate and conscious level</p>

<div align="center">
<hr align="center" size="2" width="100%" /></div>

<p><strong>Stopping ketamine</strong></p>

<p>If significant side effects occur (especially sedation and reduced respiratory rate) then stop the ketamine.&#160; If, 24 hours after reaching the maximum dose, there has been no improvement in pain, stop the ketamine (tapering is not required).</p>

<p>If good analgesia occurs, consider gradually tapering the dose by similar increments and rate as the above titration. If pain recurs, consider either an oral or subcut&#160;maintenance dose (discuss monitoring arrangements for hepatotoxicity and urotoxicity with a consultant) or another analgesic agent, e.g. methadone.</p>

<hr />
<table style="width:100%">
	<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:180px;">
			<p><strong>Absolute Contraindications</strong></p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:180px;">
			<p>Previous serious reaction</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:180px;">
			<p>Recent or poorly controlled seizures</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:180px;">
			<p>Raised intracranial pressure</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:180px;">
			<p>Uncontrolled hypertension</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
	</tbody>
</table>

<hr />
<table style="width:100%">
	<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:180px;">
			<p><strong>Precautions</strong></p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:180px;">
			<p>Brain metastases</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:180px;">
			<p>Possible raised ICP</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:180px;">
			<p>Previous strokes</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:180px;">
			<p>Severe cardiac failure</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:180px;">
			<p>Tachyarrhythmias</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:180px;">
			<p>History of glaucoma</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
	</tbody>
</table>

<hr />
<table style="width:100%">
	<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:180px;">
			<p><strong>Adverse Effects</strong></p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:180px;">
			<p>Improved efficacy of other opioids resulting in opioid toxicity</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:180px;">
			<p>Sympathomimetic effects - raised blood pressure, tachycardia</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:180px;">
			<p>Psychomimetic effects – vivid dreams, hallucinations, agitation, sedation</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:180px;">
			<p>Urotoxicity – suspect if recurrent UTI-like symptoms</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
	</tbody>
</table>

<hr />
<table style="width:100%">
	<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:180px;">
			<p><strong>Subcut Ketamine</strong></p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:180px;">
			<p>5mg oral ≈ 5mg SC</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:180px;">
			<p><strong>Compatible with: (use NaCl 0.9% unless otherwise stated):</strong></p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:180px;">
			<p>Fentanyl</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:180px;">
			<p>Haloperidol</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:180px;">
			<p>Hydromorphone</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:180px;">
			<p>Levomepromazine</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:180px;">
			<p>Methadone</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:180px;">
			<p>Midazolam</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:180px;">
			<p>Morphine</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:180px;">
			<p>Haloperidol <em>+ </em>midazolam</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:180px;">
			<p>Morphine <em>+ </em>haloperidol</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:180px;">
			<p>Morphine <em>+ </em>midazolam</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
	</tbody>
</table>


</body></html>