<html xml:lang="en-us" lang="en-us" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"><head>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/base.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/kotobeeInteractive.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/global.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/base.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/global.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/kotobeeInteractive.css" />

    <script type="text/javascript" src="../../../../js/kotobeeInteractive.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../../../../js/global.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../js/kotobeeInteractive.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../js/global.js"></script>

    <title>Malignant bowel obstruction</title>
    
<meta name="m-checksum" content="1321602823" />

<meta charset="utf-8" />
 <meta name="kotobee-chapter" content="epubypzqs/EPUB/xhtml/ssd9h4.xhtml" />
<meta name="kotobee-book" content="urn:uuid:af396a50-eea3-81f8-9408-8c51f3275e9e" />
</head>
<body>
<p>It is wise to consult early with a palliative care consultant as bowel obstruction in malignancy is a dynamic and complex situation. The underlying pathology may cause a physical obstruction (“mechanical bowel obstruction”) or there may be pathology causing a predominantly ileus type scenario where the bowel stops working properly (“functional bowel obstruction”). There is often a combination of both.</p>

<p><strong><em>“Functional bowel obstruction”</em></strong></p>

<p>Suspect this in patients with peritoneal disease with vomiting, markedly reduced frequency of bowel movement and <em>an absence</em> <em>of</em> colicky abdominal pain. Up to 50% of women with ovarian cancer will experience a degree of “functional obstruction” because the abdominal and pelvic cavity becomes matted and stuck down with autonomic dysfunction due to tumour infiltration. Bowel sounds may be quiet.</p>

<p>First-line treatment includes:</p>

<ul>
	<li>Consider NG tube and IV or subcut fluids if there is significant vomiting</li>
	<li>Metoclopramide 30mg CSCI over 24 hours to promote peristalsis. Titrate up to 60mg daily if necessary. If colicky pains occurs, stop metoclopramide as this worsens colic and manage as a mechanical bowel obstruction.</li>
	<li>Stool softeners such as sodium docusate 200mg twice daily orally or macrogol as tolerated</li>
	<li>Dexamethasone 8mg subcut daily (orally it won’t be absorbed)</li>
</ul>

<p><strong><em>“Mechanical Bowel Obstruction”</em></strong></p>

<p>A mechanical bowel obstruction may develop de novo (e.g. due to mass effect in colorectal cancer or pancreas cancer) or a “functional bowel obstruction” may develop into a more typical mechanical obstruction. Patients present with colicky abdominal pain, worsening vomiting abdominal distension, and absolute constipation. Investigating with a CT scan and considering stenting or surgery is often appropriate.</p>

<p>Treat vomiting and distension with anti-secretory agents:</p>

<ul>
	<li>Consider NG tube insertion + IV or subcut fluids</li>
	<li>Hyoscine butylbromide <em><sup>(PBS authority)</sup></em> 80mg via CSCI over 24 hours<br />
	<em>And</em></li>
	<li>Ranitidine <em><sup>(non-PBS)</sup></em> 150mg via CSCI over 24 hours</li>
</ul>

<p>Additional symptomatic relief is important, including:</p>

<ul>
	<li>Haloperidol for any ongoing nausea (e.g. 0.5mg 2-hourly PRN)</li>
	<li>An opioid for analgesia</li>
</ul>

<p>If the aim is to try and restore bowel movements, consider:</p>

<ul>
	<li>Dexamethasone 8mg SC daily (reduce peri-tumour oedema)</li>
	<li>Sodium docusate orally and softeners per rectum in case constipation / hard stools are playing a role</li>
</ul>

<p>If vomiting persists:&#160;</p>

<ul>
	<li>If minimal oral intake, add octreotide <em><sup>(special access scheme)</sup></em> 500mcg via CSCI over 24 hours (an anti-secretory agent)</li>
	<li>Anti-secretory drugs will be less effective if eating and drinking – consider an NG tube or venting PEG</li>
</ul>

<p>If nausea persists, switch haloperidol to levomepromazine <em><sup>(special access scheme)</sup></em> 12.5mg via CSCI over 24 hours.</p>

<table style="width:100%">
	<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:217px;">
			<p><strong>To also consider:</strong></p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:217px;">
			<p>Imaging with a CT scan can (a) confirm the diagnosis and (b) determine if obstruction is unifocal or multifocal</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:217px;">
			<p>If unifocal obstruction on CT scan, consider asking for advice regarding whether the lesion is amenable&#160; to endoscopic stenting or surgical intervention</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:217px;">
			<p>In intractable nausea and vomiting, consider a venting gastrostomy (speak to a gastroenterologist or interventional radiologist)</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
	</tbody>
</table>


</body></html>