<html xml:lang="en-us" lang="en-us" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"><head>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/base.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/kotobeeInteractive.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/global.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/base.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/global.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/kotobeeInteractive.css" />

    <script type="text/javascript" src="../../../../js/kotobeeInteractive.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../../../../js/global.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../js/kotobeeInteractive.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../js/global.js"></script>

    <title>Constipation</title>
    

<meta name="m-checksum" content="1175257945" />
<meta charset="utf-8" />
 <meta name="kotobee-chapter" content="epubypzqs\EPUB\xhtml\sw5oxi.xhtml" />
<meta name="kotobee-book" content="urn:uuid:a52809ab-66e6-2d0c-c792-c212f4718d6d" />
</head>
<body>
<p>Anticipate constipation, especially in patients prescribed opioids, and start prophylactic laxatives where appropriate. If appropriate encourage increased fluids and fruit intake and encourage mobilization if appropriate. Avoid ispaghula (e.g. Fybogel) as it worsens constipation if fluid intake is inadequate.</p>

<p><em>Initial therapy</em>&#160;-&gt;&#160;oral therapy with a softener and/or stimulant is appropriate</p>

<ul style="list-style-type:circle;">
	<li>Docusate 1 tablet twice daily regularly (or PRN) (a softener for hard stools)<br />
	AND/OR</li>
	<li>Sennoside 1 tablet twice daily (or PRN) or picosulfate oral 10 drops twice daily (a stimulant)</li>
</ul>

<p>Doses can be titrated up or down based on level of constipation. Titrate up the softener if stool hard and/or colicky discomfort&#160;present; titrate stimulants up if patient struggling to expel soft stool.</p>

<p><em>If constipation continues</em> -&gt; consider rectal treatments, e.g.</p>

<ul style="list-style-type:circle;">
	<li>Bisacodyl 1 suppository daily PRN (if stools soft)</li>
	<li>Microlax 1 enema daily PRN (if stool hard)</li>
</ul>

<p><em>For severe, refractory constipation</em>&#160;-&gt;&#160;options include</p>

<ul style="list-style-type:circle;">
	<li>High dose softener (PicoPrep)</li>
	<li>High bowel intervention, e.g. Fleet enema</li>
	<li>Methylnaltrexone <em><sup>(streamlined authority)</sup></em> if opioid-induced</li>
	<li>Manual evacuation (ensure PRN analgesia / sedation available)</li>
	<li>Consider - is <a class="link335" href="ssd9h4.xhtml">bowel obstruction </a>present?</li>
	<li>If pseudo-obstruction, consider neostigmine 0.5mg subcut twice daily (see <a class="link344" href="../../../raw/s4izqd.xhtml">Appendix - Neostigmine</a>)</li>
</ul>

<table>
	<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td><strong>Methylnaltrexone</strong></td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>Peripherally acting opioid antagonist</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>Used for opioid-induced constipation refractory to appropriately titrated&#160; laxatives and enemas</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>
			<p><em>Dose:</em></p>

			<ul>
				<li>12mg subcut (if &gt; 62 kg)</li>
				<li>OR 8mg subcut (if 38-61kg)</li>
				<li>OR 0.15mg/kg (if &lt;38kg)</li>
				<li>Repeat on day 2 if required</li>
				<li>If required, can continue to give every second day</li>
			</ul>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>
			<p>Can result in a massive bowel action within an hour. Is a commode required?</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>Can cause severe abdominal cramps. Ensure subcut hyoscine butylbromide (Buscopan) + subcut opioids available</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td><em><strong>Contraindicated </strong></em>in bowel obstruction</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td>Dose reduction required in renal failure</td>
		</tr>
	</tbody>
</table>

<p>&#160;</p>

<p><em>In constipation associated with spinal cord compression</em>&#160;-&gt;</p>

<ul style="list-style-type:circle;">
	<li>Oral laxatives<br />
	PLUS<br />
	Bisacodyl suppository each morning (or every second morning)</li>
</ul>


</body></html>