<html xml:lang="en-us" lang="en-us" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops"><head>
    <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/base.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/kotobeeInteractive.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../../../../css/global.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/base.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/global.css" />
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../css/kotobeeInteractive.css" />

    <script type="text/javascript" src="../../../../js/kotobeeInteractive.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../../../../js/global.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../js/kotobeeInteractive.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="../js/global.js"></script>

    <title>Phenobarbitone infusions</title>
    
<meta name="m-checksum" content="-854279481" />

<meta charset="utf-8" />
 <meta name="kotobee-chapter" content="epubypzqs/EPUB/xhtml/sydm84.xhtml" />
<meta name="kotobee-book" content="urn:uuid:5bff27e6-3c8b-239d-8f6c-5097b500bae0" />
</head>
<body>
<p><strong>Appendix - Phenobarbitone</strong></p>

<p><strong><em>Phenobarbitone in palliative patients should only be used under the direction of a palliative care specialist. Speak to one before initiating phenobarbitone.</em></strong></p>

<p><strong>Indications:</strong></p>

<ul>
	<li>Terminal agitation refractory to other treatments (e.g. midazolam &gt; 60mg/day <em>and </em>either haloperidol &gt; 10mg/day <em>or</em> levomepromazine &gt; 100mg/day) <em>(non-PBS indication)</em></li>
	<li>Status epilepticus or recurrent seizures in an imminently dying patient that has been refractory to benzodiazepine therapy</li>
</ul>

<hr />
<p><strong>For Refractory Terminal Restlessness or Refractory Terminal Seizures:&#160;</strong></p>

<p><em><u>Initial dose:</u></em></p>

<p>Give phenobarbitone 200mg IM or subcut</p>

<p>If agitation continues, give up to 2 further doses IM or subcut, 30 minutes apart</p>

<p><em><u>Starting a continuous subcutaneous infusion:</u></em></p>

<p>Commence an infusion at a dose of between 800mg and 1,200mg over 24 hours via CSCI (diluent is water). Use the higher dose for large patients or those who required a larger loading dose. Use the lower dose for other patients.</p>

<p><em><u>Additional medications:</u></em></p>

<p>Prescribe phenobarbitone 200mg IM or subcut 2-hourly PRN for ongoing agitation</p>

<p>Continue antipsychotics and midazolam initially – these can be discontinued once agitation is well controlled.</p>

<p>Do not stop opioids (phenobarbitone is not an analgesic).</p>

<hr />
<p>&#160;</p>

<table style="width:100%">
	<tbody>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:179px;">
			<p><strong>Phenobarbitone Precautions</strong></p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:179px;">
			<p>Stat doses of phenobarbitone subcut have been reported to cause tissue necrosis, therefore IM is preferred</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:179px;">
			<p>Phenobarbitone is incompatible with other drugs therefore use a separate syringe pump</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:179px;">
			<p>Dilute to the maximum volume possible to reduce site irritation. Manufacturer recommends diluting 10 times.</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
		<tr>
			<td style="width:179px;">
			<p>Phenobarbitone cannot be mixed with any other medications subcutaneously.</p>
			</td>
		</tr>
	</tbody>
</table>

<p>&#160;</p>

<p>&#160;</p>

<p>&#160;</p>


</body></html>